SPASS-SPL_README.md, before:

## Toolchain

The different steps in our toolchain have to be executed manually. In the first step SPASS-SPL transform an HBS(SLR)PP problem in the FTCNF language into an equisatisfiable HBS problem in the Datalog language, using the [Rulewerk rule syntax](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk/wiki/Rule-syntax-grammar). 

The bash commands look as follows:

    ./SPASS-SPL -d -n <file>.ftcnf > <file>.rls

Secondly, the Datalog `.rls` file is processed by the [VLog](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog) Java API [Rulewrk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk). We created a [small java project eval-datalog-arithmetic](https://github.com/knowsys/eval-datalog-arithmetic/tree/main/code-eval-datalog-arithmetic) that uses [Rulewrk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk) to load the `.rls` Knowledge Base, materialise it via the Datalog engine  [VLog](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog), and query for a Goal fact. If no Goal fact is derived, an alternative given query is answered to provide an explanation. We separately measure parsing, loading, reasoning (materialisation) and querying in miliseconds. 

This project uses the `0.8.0-SNAPSHOT` version of `rulewek-parser` and `rulewerk-vlog` modules, as it can be seen in the pom.xml file. In turn, `rulewerk-vlog` was used with a locally built `vlog-java` .jar from the [VLog](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog) master branch at commit tag [ca0669424963765d08a63a29a0d89e27cf33ef51](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog/commit/ca0669424963765d08a63a29a0d89e27cf33ef51). To obtain these dependencies, one can locally clone [Rulewerk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk) and run the attached script TODO to build it with the `vlog-java` .jar dependency at this specific commit tag. More details about the installation of  [Rulewerk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk) can be found [here](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk#installation).

TODO "release jar" for linux

TODO explain how to run the code

TODO alternative with client

## FTCNF Language
FTCNF is the input language of SPASS-SPL. It is possible to express any BS(LA) formula in this language. SPASS-SPL has 3 sorts: "R" for Real, "I" for Integer, and "F", which stands for a finite set whose elements are exactly the constants of the sort. Default sort for all variables and constants is "R". Default sort for all predicates with an argument of sort "R" or "I" is "R". Default sort for all predicates with an argument of sort "F" is "F".

A clause written in the language looks as follows:

    <(+(-(*(3,x),*(x,e(y,2))),6),5),  =(y,z) || P(x,y), Q(z,w) -> R(a,w), Q(z,z).

The full grammar of the language is defined below:

    <preamble>   ::= [["p("<var>":"<RIF>")" | "p("<const>":"<RIF>")"] [","["p("<var>":"<RIF>")" | "p("<const>":"<RIF>")"]]*]
    <comment>    ::= "%" <anystring until EOL>
    
    <clause>     ::= [<constraint> "||"] <atoms> -> <atoms> "."
    <gclause>    ::= g [<constraint> "||"] -> <atom> "."
    <tclause>    ::= t <catom> "||" -> <atom> "."
    <constraint> ::= <catom> ["," <catom>]*
    <atoms>      ::= [<atom> ["," <atom>]*]
    <atom>       ::= <upercaseletter>[<number> | <letter>]*"("[<terms>]")"
    <terms>      ::= <term> ["," <term>]*
    <term>       ::= <var> | <const>
    <RIF>        ::= "R" | "I" | "F" 
    <const>      ::= <abcd>[[<lowercasestring>] | [<RIF>] | [<number>]]*
    <var>        ::= <xyzuvw>[[<lowercasestring>] | [<RIF>] | [<number>]]*
    <abcd>       ::= "a" | "b" | "c" | "d" 
    <xyzuvw>     ::= "x" | "y" | "z" | "u" | "v" | "w" 
    <catom>      ::= <crel>"("<cterm>,<cterm>")"
    <crel>       ::= "<" | ">" | "=" | "<=" | ">=" | "!="
    <cterm>      ::= "+("<cterm>,<cterm>[,<cterm>]*")" | "*("<cterm>,<cterm>[,<cterm>]*")" | "-("<cterm>,<cterm>")" | "-"<number> | <number> | <var>
    <number>     ::= ["0" | "1" | "2" | "3" | "4" | "5" | "6" | "7" | "8" | "9"]+
    
    <SUPLOGin>   ::= <comment>* <preamble> <clause>* <tclause>* [<gclause>]

All variables in a `<clause>` are assumed to be universally quantified. The optional `<gclause>` defines a universal conjecture that is supposed to be verified for our set of clauses `<clause>*`. The string "Goal" cannot be used as a predicate symbol because it is reserved for our Datalog hammer.

SPASS-SPL is not yet able to recognize and handle theory constraints beyond simple bounds, unless they are positvely grounded variable comparisons (i.e., $x \LAOP y$ with $\LAOP \in \{\leq, <, \neq, =, >, \geq\}$). As a provisional workaround, it is possible to "highlight" positively grounded theory atoms `<catom>` manually. To do so, the theory atom has to be replaced by a first-order `<atom>` over a fresh predicate and the same variables as <catom>. The interpretation of `<atom>` can then be fixed to `<catom>` with the help of a theory pattern clause `<tclause> ::= <catom> || -> <atom>`. The Datalog hammer will then treat `<catom>` as if it were a positively grounded theory atom that always simplifies to true or false in elim(S,N). The user has to check themselves if this is actually the case or the result is no longer guaranteed to be sound.

## Transformation of FTCNF problems into other input languages

SPASS-SPL can transform ftcnf problems into the SMT-LIB 2.6 and into the CHC competition format. The respective options to do so are `-s` and `-c`.

Commit message:

Update SPASS-SPL_README.md about running the jar

SPASS-SPL_README.md, after:

## Toolchain

The different steps in our toolchain have to be executed manually. In the first step SPASS-SPL transform an HBS(SLR)PP problem in the FTCNF language into an equisatisfiable HBS problem in the Datalog language, using the [Rulewerk rule syntax](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk/wiki/Rule-syntax-grammar). 

The bash commands look as follows:

    ./SPASS-SPL -d -n <file>.ftcnf > <file>.rls

Secondly, the Datalog `.rls` file is processed by the [VLog](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog) Java API [Rulewrk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk). We created a [small java project eval-datalog-arithmetic](https://github.com/knowsys/eval-datalog-arithmetic/tree/main/code-eval-datalog-arithmetic) that uses [Rulewrk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk) to load the `.rls` Knowledge Base, materialise it via the Datalog engine [VLog](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog), and query for a Goal fact. We separately measure parsing, loading, reasoning (materialisation) and querying in miliseconds.
[The .jar we used to run our experiments](https://github.com/knowsys/eval-datalog-arithmetic/blob/main/code-eval-datalog-arithmetic_linux.jar) is built for a Linux machine.  Alternatively, one can locally build their own jar (also on MAC OS) using the instructions here TODO.

TO MOVE
This project uses the `0.8.0-SNAPSHOT` version of `rulewek-parser` and `rulewerk-vlog` modules, as it can be seen in the pom.xml file. In turn, `rulewerk-vlog` was used with a locally built `vlog-java.jar` from the [VLog](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog) master branch at commit tag [ca0669424963765d08a63a29a0d89e27cf33ef51](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog/commit/ca0669424963765d08a63a29a0d89e27cf33ef51). To obtain these dependencies, one can locally clone [Rulewerk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk) and run the attached [script](https://github.com/knowsys/eval-datalog-arithmetic/blob/main/build-vlog-library-ca0669424963765d08a63a29a0d89e27cf33ef51.sh) to build it with the `vlog-java.jar` dependency at this specific commit tag. This script is a modified version of a modified version of the script [build-vlog-library.sh](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk/blob/master/build-vlog-library.sh) that is used to build [Rulewerk](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk) with a speciffic version of [VLog](https://github.com/karmaresearch/vlog) (more details [here](https://github.com/knowsys/rulewerk#installation)).




TODO explain how to run the code

TODO alternative with client

## FTCNF Language
FTCNF is the input language of SPASS-SPL. It is possible to express any BS(LA) formula in this language. SPASS-SPL has 3 sorts: "R" for Real, "I" for Integer, and "F", which stands for a finite set whose elements are exactly the constants of the sort. Default sort for all variables and constants is "R". Default sort for all predicates with an argument of sort "R" or "I" is "R". Default sort for all predicates with an argument of sort "F" is "F".

A clause written in the language looks as follows:

    <(+(-(*(3,x),*(x,e(y,2))),6),5),  =(y,z) || P(x,y), Q(z,w) -> R(a,w), Q(z,z).

The full grammar of the language is defined below:

    <preamble>   ::= [["p("<var>":"<RIF>")" | "p("<const>":"<RIF>")"] [","["p("<var>":"<RIF>")" | "p("<const>":"<RIF>")"]]*]
    <comment>    ::= "%" <anystring until EOL>
    
    <clause>     ::= [<constraint> "||"] <atoms> -> <atoms> "."
    <gclause>    ::= g [<constraint> "||"] -> <atom> "."
    <tclause>    ::= t <catom> "||" -> <atom> "."
    <constraint> ::= <catom> ["," <catom>]*
    <atoms>      ::= [<atom> ["," <atom>]*]
    <atom>       ::= <upercaseletter>[<number> | <letter>]*"("[<terms>]")"
    <terms>      ::= <term> ["," <term>]*
    <term>       ::= <var> | <const>
    <RIF>        ::= "R" | "I" | "F" 
    <const>      ::= <abcd>[[<lowercasestring>] | [<RIF>] | [<number>]]*
    <var>        ::= <xyzuvw>[[<lowercasestring>] | [<RIF>] | [<number>]]*
    <abcd>       ::= "a" | "b" | "c" | "d" 
    <xyzuvw>     ::= "x" | "y" | "z" | "u" | "v" | "w" 
    <catom>      ::= <crel>"("<cterm>,<cterm>")"
    <crel>       ::= "<" | ">" | "=" | "<=" | ">=" | "!="
    <cterm>      ::= "+("<cterm>,<cterm>[,<cterm>]*")" | "*("<cterm>,<cterm>[,<cterm>]*")" | "-("<cterm>,<cterm>")" | "-"<number> | <number> | <var>
    <number>     ::= ["0" | "1" | "2" | "3" | "4" | "5" | "6" | "7" | "8" | "9"]+
    
    <SUPLOGin>   ::= <comment>* <preamble> <clause>* <tclause>* [<gclause>]

All variables in a `<clause>` are assumed to be universally quantified. The optional `<gclause>` defines a universal conjecture that is supposed to be verified for our set of clauses `<clause>*`. The string "Goal" cannot be used as a predicate symbol because it is reserved for our Datalog hammer.

SPASS-SPL is not yet able to recognize and handle theory constraints beyond simple bounds, unless they are positvely grounded variable comparisons (i.e., $x \LAOP y$ with $\LAOP \in \{\leq, <, \neq, =, >, \geq\}$). As a provisional workaround, it is possible to "highlight" positively grounded theory atoms `<catom>` manually. To do so, the theory atom has to be replaced by a first-order `<atom>` over a fresh predicate and the same variables as <catom>. The interpretation of `<atom>` can then be fixed to `<catom>` with the help of a theory pattern clause `<tclause> ::= <catom> || -> <atom>`. The Datalog hammer will then treat `<catom>` as if it were a positively grounded theory atom that always simplifies to true or false in elim(S,N). The user has to check themselves if this is actually the case or the result is no longer guaranteed to be sound.

## Transformation of FTCNF problems into other input languages

SPASS-SPL can transform ftcnf problems into the SMT-LIB 2.6 and into the CHC competition format. The respective options to do so are `-s` and `-c`.
